Civil War (comics)
"Civil War" is a 2006–2007 Marvel Comics crossover storyline built around a seven-issue limited series of the same name written by Mark Millar and penciled by Steve McNiven, which ran through various other titles published by Marvel at the time. The storyline builds upon the events that developed in previous Marvel crossovers, particularly "Avengers Disassembled", House of M, "Decimation", and Silent War. The tagline for the series is "Whose Side Are You On?"
The plot of the series follows a framework storyline in which the U.S. government passes a Superhero Registration Act ostensibly designed to have superpowered characters act under official regulation, somewhat akin to police officers. However, those opposed to the act, led by Captain America, find themselves in conflict with those that support the act, led by Iron Man, with Spider-Man caught in the middle; the X-Men take a neutral stance. The superheroes in support of the law, led by Iron Man, Dr. Reed Richards and Ms. Marvel, increasingly become authoritarian. In the aftermath of the war, Captain America surrenders and is imprisoned. The events of the series touch upon themes of liberty, moral responsibility, and civil order, with well-intentioned superhero characters finding themselves upon different sides and allegories for real-life events and discussions. The series received polarizing reviews but was a commercial success. The series is the basis for the upcoming 2016 Marvel Studios film Captain America: Civil War, which likewise will feature Captain America and Iron Man in oppostion to each other.


Publication historyEdit
The premise of Civil War involves the introduction of a Superhuman Registration Act in the United States. Similar acts have been used as literary devices in Uncanny X-Men, DC: The New Frontier, Powers, Watchmen, The Incredibles, and Astro City. Mark Millar, writer for the story, has said:
The act requires any person in the United States with superhuman abilities to register with the federal government as a "human weapon of mass destruction," reveal their true identity to the authorities, and undergo proper training. Those who sign also have the option of working for S.H.I.E.L.D., earning a salary and benefits such as those earned by other American civil servants. Characters within the superhero community in the Marvel Universe split into two groups: one advocating the registration as a responsible obligation, and the other opposing the law on the grounds that it violates civil liberties and the protection that secret identities provide. A number of villains have also chosen to take sides, some choosing to side with the registration, others against it. Luke Cage (previously the second Power Man), an African American, compared registration to slavery, and did so to Iron Man's face. Others compared the act to the norms under which the police and soldiers operate.


DelaysEdit
Marvel announced in August 2006 that some issues of the main Civil War series would be pushed back several months to accommodate artist Steve McNiven. The schedule had issue #4 being released one month late, in September, while issue #5 was released two months later, in November. Furthermore, various tie-in books including the Civil War: Front Line miniseries and tie-in issues of other comics were delayed several months so as not to reveal any plot developments.
In late November, Marvel announced another delay. Civil War #6, originally scheduled for release on December 20, was pushed back two weeks and released on January 4. Unlike the previous instance, only The Punisher War Journal #2 was delayed. In a final act of rescheduling, Civil War #7 was pushed back two weeks (from January 17 to January 31), and then pushed back again until February 21.


PlotEdit
In summary, an explosion in Stamford by the villain Nitro causes the US Government to introduce the Superhero Registration Act. Those not adhering to it are deemed unregistered and rogue superheroes. Tony Stark and Dr Reed Richards lead the side of the pro-registration superhero. Captain America leads the anti-registration side. Spider-Man, initially with Tony Stark, eventually joins the team of Captain America. Goliath is killed by the pro-registration superheroes. Many super-villains join the Government in hunting down superheroes.


BeginningEdit
Civil War follows the implementation and consequences of the Superhuman Registration Act, a legislative bill which required the mandatory registration of any person based in the United States with super powers. The act arose due to public pressure for accountability following a series of superhuman-related events causing significant damage and death within the Marvel universe, such as an attack on Manhattan in reprisal for Nick Fury's "Secret War", and the Hulk's rampage in Las Vegas which resulted in the death of 26 people. When the mutant population was drastically reduced in the aftermath of M-Day, itself caused by a mutant, anti-mutant hysteria caused by extremist groups caused a majority of the remaining mutants, known as the 198, to relocate to the Xavier Institute, and raised public support for the proposed act.
Public sentiment toward superheroes plummeted after an incident in Stamford, Connecticut, in which the New Warriors, a group of young superheroes and the focus of a reality TV show, botched an attempt to apprehend a group of supervillains in a quest for better ratings. In the resulting fight the villain Nitro used his explosive powers to destroy several city blocks, including an elementary school at the epicenter, resulting in the death of over 600 civilians, 60 of whom were children, with just Speedball of the Warriors and Nitro himself surviving. Although many high-profile superheroes assisted in the relief and rescue effort, there were a number of isolated revenge attacks, and support for registration rose.
The prospect of registration divided the superhuman community down the middle, with Tony Stark, the superhero Iron Man who had previously tried to halt the act, becoming the pro-registration figurehead, and Captain America leading the anti-registration group. Iron Man, with Mr. Fantastic and Henry Pym, argued that the changing political landscape meant that resisting the law was pointless, and that it is reasonable for heroes to have proper training and oversight, whereas Captain America, alongside Luke Cage and Falcon argued that heroes required secrecy in order to protect aspects of their 'normal' life, such as spouses and children, and to allow them to act in whatever means are needed, against threats which the ordinary emergency services couldn't cope with. Although nominally a U.N. agency, S.H.I.E.L.D. assumed the brunt of enforcing the act under acting director Maria Hill.


EscalationEdit
The opposing sides initially traded propagandic victories, with the anti-registration heroes continuing to fight supervillains, leaving them restrained to be found by the authorities, whilst the pro-registration side attempted to locate and arrest any superperson who was not registered. The first major coup for either side came when Iron Man convinced Spider-Man to publicly reveal his identity, a secret the latter had worked hard to maintain. During this time many tie-in titles concerned with the war's impact on the wider Marvel universe were published. These detailed Wolverine's hunt for Nitro after fleeing the scene at Stamford, Cyclops' declaration of the X-Men and all remaining mutants as officially neutral, the effect of the war on other supergroups including the pro-registration Thunderbolts and the neutral Runaways, and the reaction of the criminal element (many of whom fled to Canada).
The conflict escalated when Captain America led the anti-registration heroes, known as the Secret Avengers, into an ambush by the pro-registration forces. While shaking hands with Iron Man before a peaceful discussion of the crisis, Captain America used a hidden device to disable Iron Man's armor and sucker-punched him. A public brawl between the pro and anti-registration forces ensued. During the battle, a clone of Thor was sent to assist in the arrest of the anti-registration heroes, but instead killed Goliath by blasting him through his chest. As the pro-registration heroes attempted to control the clone, the Secret Avengers retreated.
In order to contain the superpeople unwilling to register, Iron Man and Mr. Fantastic built a prison in the Negative Zone; it was dubbed "Project 42" because it was the 42nd project they had developed after the Stamford tragedy. Learning that people who did not agree to register would be imprisoned indefinitely and following a battle with Iron Man, Spider-Man quit the pro-registration side and joined Captain America's underground movement. Unknown to Spider-Man, Tony Stark was using his spider suit to secretly analyze his powers and develop ways to overcome them. The Punisher obtained the plans for Project 42 by covertly infiltrating the Baxter Building, home of the Fantastic Four.


FinaleEdit
The Secret Avengers and their allies reached Riker's Island penitentiary. Betrayed by Tigra, they were met by Iron Man and the pro-registration forces, and a number of supervillains who were being controlled by nanites. Hulkling used his shape-shifting ability to assume the role of Henry Pym and release the incarcerated heroes, leading to an all-out battle between the two sides.
During the fight Cloak teleported the battle to the centre of New York City, where the pro-registration forces were joined by the fixed Thor clone and Captain Marvel, and Namor led an army of Atlanteans to assist the Secret Avengers. Captain America targeted Iron Man, whose armor had been compromised by the Vision II. As Captain America was about to deliver a finishing blow, several non-superpowered emergency service personnel held him back. Wishing to avert further property damage and bloodshed, Captain America surrendered, marking the end of the Civil War.
Two weeks later, the Fifty State Initiative was launched and the Mighty Avengers assembled as a team. Tony Stark was appointed Director of S.H.I.E.L.D., and Maria Hill was demoted to deputy status. Some heroes moved to Canada, while some stayed underground including the New Avengers. Many of the Secret Avengers were given amnesty by the government, while Captain America was placed in jail. Captain America was later apparently shot to death by Crossbones and Sharon Carter (the latter hypnotised by Dr. Faustus) outside the courthouse, on the day of his arraignment.


Aftermath DetailsEdit
Captain America is apparently assassinated by Crossbones (acting on orders from the Red Skull) and S.H.I.E.L.D. agent Sharon Carter (who had been brainwashed by Doctor Faustus).
The Avengers Initiative is created.
Iron Man becomes the director of S.H.I.E.L.D.
The New Avengers go underground. Iron Fist, Doctor Strange and Ronin (Clint Barton) join the team.
Iron Man sets up his own team of Avengers (featured in the title The Mighty Avengers).
Camp Hammond is built on the ruins of the Stamford Disaster.
The Thunderbolts become a federal agency with Norman Osborn as its director.
Mister Fantastic and the Invisible Woman take a leave of absence from the Fantastic Four, and are replaced by the Black Panther and Storm.


Other versionsEdit


Earth-3490Edit
When Mister Fantastic was researching realities where the Civil War ended differently, he found one reality in which their version of Anthony Stark was a woman named Natasha Stark. The Civil War was avoided entirely in this reality due to her marriage to Steve Rogers.


Spider-VerseEdit
During an attempt by the reality-displaced Superior Spider-Man (Doctor Octopus' mind in Peter Parker's body) to reach back to his dimension as seen in the Spider-Verse storyline, he discovered an alternate dimension where a Civil War Iron Spider-Man lies dead (killed by Karn) prompting him to continue investigating the killings of Spider-men throughout the Multiverse.


What If?Edit
In What If Civil War Ended Differently?, a stranger appears in front of Iron Man, who is visiting Captain America’s grave at Arlington National Cemetery. Tony Stark is told of two alternate ways the Civil War could have concluded:
The first is detailed in, "What if Captain America led all the heroes against the Registration Act?" In this reality, Tony Stark dies of the Extremis virus, leaving the U.S. government to choose Steve Rogers as the spokesperson for heroes, who as in the regular universe opposes registration. Though he manages to delay its passing, the Stamford disaster occurs as in the 616 reality. Without Tony Stark to provide a fairer path for registration, the government's response is more extreme. Governmental forces led by Henry Peter Gyrich destroy the resistance and many heroes are slain.
The second is detailed in, "What if Iron Man lost the Civil War?" In this reality, Iron Man asks for Cap's help in chapter three instead of threatening him, admitting his doubts about his actions rather than trying to justify them, and thus Cap does not use the hidden weapon in his glove to disable Tony's armor. The heroes unite to stop the out-of-control Thor clone, Ragnarok, which is released when Hill detects the weapon and assumes that Cap is still planning to use it. The resulting goodwill convinces Captain America to help run the program as he is the only one the heroes will trust with their secret identities.
The stranger is revealed to be Uatu, Earth 616's Watcher. Upon learning of the possibility of this alternate reality, Tony is devastated and weeps for the bright future he helped prevent.
In a special What If: Annihilation by David Hine and Mico Suayan, a cosmic war reaches Earth. The heroes unite to neutralize it, and many die in the first clashes. Captain America and Iron Man, after a final reconciliation, sacrifice themselves alongside Nova to deflect the full Annihilation Wave.


Civil War (2015)Edit
The Civil War storyline will be featured in Secret Wars where it will have its own mini-series. Its location on Battleworld is referred to as the Warzone.
It began with the unforgettable on an unknown Marvel Universe that would later become the Warzone on Battleworld: the Stamford Incident, It was an explosion that killed hundreds. The following debate with the push for the Superhuman Registration Act blossomed into the unthinkable: an ideological conflict among the super heroes, polarised into two camps, around the anti-registration Captain America and the pro-registration Iron Man. Everyone else hoped it would just end. But it took another incident to incite the unspeakable....Captain America had led his team in a mission to liberate the political prisoners being held in Prison 42 in the Negative Zone. Due to spies, Iron Man had mustered his forces in an ambush, bolstering his super heroes with S.H.I.E.L.D. troops and conscripted villains. Meanwhile, Black Panther was hacking the prison's computers, and discovered that the pro-reg forces had activate a self-destruct system, with Iron Man's group supposed to teleport out at the last minute. However, Iron Man didn't know about the activation of this system and was informed by Maria Hill that Black Panther had been who activated the system under Captain America's orders. Deactivating the teleportation device, Black Panther tried to shut down the bomb. Everyone in the prison whether they were Pro-Registration or Anti-Registration rushed to escape through the power of the hero Cloak who dropped them all in midair in St. Louis. Unfortunately, Cloak could not shut off his powers fast enough to block out the explosion which caused a beam of explosive energy to strike the ground in St. Louis, setting off a domino of explosions which toppled buildings, killed superheroes, and left millions dead. In the aftermath, the surviving heroes regrouped where each side blaming the other for the deathsand neither willing to accept their part since they were, after all, good people who fought bad people. Unable to accommodate compromise, they left the nation open to attacks like the Skrull Invasion and the Osborn Insurgency. But no force was able to face un-co-ordinated attacks from two sides at once, and eventually, the two sides were left to settle their differences, eventually splitting the nation down the middle. Everything to the East is now "the Iron" run by Iron Man and everything to the West is "The Blue" run by Captain America. Differences in politics have caused people to pick one side over the other, with the split ossifying every year. The only place in the country that embraces both is a community in the ruins of St. Louis, built on a bridge over a chasm between the two sides. One of its inhabitants Miriam Sharpe, a woman who lost her child at Stamford who wants to bring peace. She has arranged a meeting between the two sides, and she is being interviewed. The interviewer points out that she is a polarizing figure having received threats and been compared explicitly to anarchists and terrorists. Miriam responds that her motives are clear and she has hope. From the east comes President Tony Stark where he is backed by She-Hulk. From the west comes General Rogers who is back by Peter Parker. Greetings are terse, but before going in, Stark offers a goodwill gesture: in his entourage is Mary Jane Parker and her young daughter and they have come to see Peter for as long as the talks go on. In the talks, Miriam is able to get the two men open up. Tony Stark explains that the Iron (as the internationally recognized government) has wealth and resources from trade with the outside world where the Blue is regarded as a rogue state. However, his citizens are running out of space while the Blue has twice the space but half the population. He proposes that the Blue shrink giving his people more space in exchange for which Stark will make trade concessions. General Rogers dismisses the offer which leads to the start of an old debate between the to men. General Rogers accuses President Stark of grabbing for power while President Stark says that General Rogers is just a general now, defined by his war and reluctant to see it end. As Miriam Sharpe tries to bring peace, she is suddenly shot in the back by a sniper. Reacting first, General Rogers calls Peter Parker to catch the shooter. Leaving his family, Parker finds a remote-controlled sniper rifle. As Miriam dies, General Rogers realizes that from the angle of the shot that the shooter was most likely aiming at him. President Stark denies the shooter is one of his, but it seems that the war is set to reignite once again demanding that people pick a side.
Using a drone, President Stark spied on the Blue to try to find the assassin's trail. Before it could go further into the Blue, it was intercepted and destroyed by Storm who took it to Steeltown to have its core analysed. The other components of the drone were turn into a lump of metal and thrown to Resilient Alpha as a warning. Back on the Blue, General Rogers and Peter Parker were discussing the next course of action before deciding to see Hank McCoy's progress in "Project Bellcurve." President Stark continued investigating Sharpe's murder when he discovered certain anomaly regarding past events, because numerous of these were statiscally improbable considering the landspace of the conflict, leading him to believe that numerous events like Sharpe's murder were caused by a third party. Meanwhile, Hank McCoy showcased Rogers the results of Project Bellcurve, a procedure capable of depowering superhumans such as William Baker. Numerous resources from the Iron were needed to continue the project, for which Rogers sent a team led by Parker (composed of Elektra, Azari, and Venom/Clint Barton) to infiltrate Stark's territory. At the same time, Stark was sending Jen Walters to infliltrate the Blue, to continue investigating Sharpe's murder.
Spider-Man's team suffered the fist casualty when a Stark Sentinel killed Elektra. After destroying one of the robots, Spider-Man and the rest of the team proceeded to quickly get past them as the Sentinels worked only as an external defense, so they wouldn't attack their own base. Spider-Man's team finished dealing with the robotic defenses of the facility and came across the final obstacle, the reanimated corpse of the Kingpin controlled by Doctor Octopus' tentacles, which spotted and attacked them almost immediately. Venom saved the rest of the team from Kingpin's clutches and they continued the mission, ultimately returning to the Blue with every component needed for "Project Bellcurve." At the same time, She-Hulk had been capable of bypassing the mental scan by an elder and almost decrepit Professor X and infiltrated the streets of Steeltown. However, Agent Robbie Baldwin of the Punishers recognized her and followed She-Hulk through the city until she had gotten to the end of the assassin's trail. She discovers that the assassin was Bullseye. As Jen was spying on Bullseye from his window, Baldwin caught up with her. Even though She-Hulk was able to easily dispatch him, she was forced to flee as it was only a matter of time reinforcements arrived. She was leaping through the rooftops of Steeltown when she was soon attacked by an unidentified enemy and disappeared from the scene before the Punishers could get her. She-Hulk awoke in an undisclosed location having been captured by Bullseye's client Black Panther.
As the Blue prepared to invade the Iron in a last-ditch attempt at ending the war, Iron Man tracked down Jen's position and flew to rescue her. He found her in a secret compound found below the Divide, Iron Man was kickly attacked by its defenses and neutralized. After his armor was stripped from him, Tony was brought to Black Panther who revealed himself as the Skrull Queen Veranke. Veranke stated that she is the cause of every single failed attempt at reaching peace in a part of a plan to benefit from the never-ending war. Iron Man used additional weaponry that was not in his armor to free himself from Queen Veranke's guard and reveal him and his subordinates as Skrulls. Iron Man was able to fend off the Skrull guards and break She-Hulk free from her cage who in turn saved Iron Man from the remaining Skrulls. Meanwhile, the Blue kept invading the Iron and engaged in combat against its forces when General America was about to detonate a bomb derived from Project Bellcurve.


ReceptionEdit
The series received a split response from critics and audiences. The biggest complaints were about the abrupt ending. Some reviewers have called the pro/anti-registration plot point very flimsy and even ridiculous.
According to a scholarly analysis presented at the 2007 Comic-Con International, this story's conflict is a natural outgrowth of what psychologist Erich Fromm called "the basic human dilemma", the conflicting desires for both security and freedom, and "character motivations on both sides arise from positive human qualities because Fromm’s image of human nature is ultimately optimistic, holding that people on either side are struggling to find what is best for all".


Comic tie-insEdit


Road To Civil WarEdit
Amazing Spider-Man #529–531
Fantastic Four #536 & 537
New Avengers: Illuminati Special #1


Civil WarEdit


From the Pages of Civil WarEdit
Penance Relentless #1–5


EpilogueEdit
Captain America (5th series) #25
Fantastic Four (3rd series) #543


Casualties of WarEdit
Blade (3rd series) #5
Ghost Rider (4th series) #8–11
Moon Knight (3rd series) #7–9
Winter Soldier: Winter Kills #1
Wolverine (2nd series) #48
the Great One


The InitiativeEdit
Black Panther (2nd series) #26–30
Fantastic Four (3rd series) #544–550
Iron Man (2nd series) #15–18
Moon Knight (3rd series) #11–13
New Avengers (1st series) #28–31
Punisher War Journal (2nd series) #6–11
Captain America (5th series) #26–30
Thunderbolts (1st series) #112–115


Related but not listedEdit
The 2006 Eternals relaunch has the Civil War play a fairly present background in the setting with Sprite appearing in pro-registration PSAs. In issue #3, Iron Man reminds Sersi to register. In issue #6, Iron Man and Hank Pym try to get the Eternals to register again, but they refuse. In the end, Zuras explains that the Eternals have no desire to meddle with humanity, and will stay out of their affairs, which Iron Man concedes as a fair compromise.
Daredevil #87 leads into Civil War: Choosing Sides (one-shot).
New X-Men #28 and She-Hulk #9 are indirectly, but strongly involved.
In Black Panther #19–20 "World Tour" Black Panther meets with Doctor Doom, then the Inhumans, to discuss the Civil War (these are not listed as official tie-ins due to a marketing error).
Marvel Comics Presents (vol. 2) #12 involves a patsy attempt to get Man-Thing to register with the government. The story was published late (October 2008 cover date), during Secret Invasion and the same month as Marvel Zombies 3, in which Man-Thing also appeared.
The cover of Nextwave: Agents of H.A.T.E. #11 features a Civil War parody cover including a plaid background, the words "Not part of a Marvel Comics event," and Aaron Stack holding up a card reading "Mark Millar licks goats."
Spider-Man and Power Pack #3 (March 2007) includes a parody entitled "Civil Wards," written by Marc Sumerak and illustrated by Chris Giarrusso.
The final issue of Robert Kirkman's Marvel Team-Up opens with Peter Parker getting ready to travel to Washington with Iron Man.
The third issue of the 2006 Union Jack miniseries also mentions Tony Stark and Peter Parker's trip to Washington.
Incredible Hulk #100 includes a 12-page backup story dealing with Mister Fantastic's involvement with the Thor clone, and the repercussions of the Illuminati having exiled the Hulk into space.
In Annihilation #4, the former Earth hero Nova is aware of the Civil War and is disappointed with the actions the heroes have taken, as they are not united against the threat of Annihilus.
In Friendly Neighborhood Spider-Man #6–10, Spider-Man is seen wearing the new suit he got in The Road to Civil War.
In Sensational Spider-Man #26–27, Spider-Man is seen wearing the new suit he got in The Road to Civil War.
In Sensational Spider-Man #28–34, Spider-Man deals with the aftermath of revealing his identity.


Trade PaperbacksEdit


Collected editionsEdit


In other mediaEdit


NovelizationEdit
Marvel adapted Civil War into a prose hardcover novel in July 2012 as the first of a series of four novels adapting some of Marvel's most significant fictional events. It was written by Stuart Moore, the writer of Namor: The First Mutant. The book expanded on the story and set the events during Barack Obama's first term in office, rather than George W. Bush's last term; Tony Stark makes reference to the Affordable Care Act when speaking to Spider-Man in the first chapter of the novel. The novel is set in the alternate timeline created by the controversial storyline "One More Day" and detailed in "One Moment in Time", as Spider-Man is depicted as never having married Mary Jane Watson, having never arrived on the day of their wedding. In the original comics version, Civil War was a lead-in to "One More Day", depicting May Parker's assassination on the orders of Wilson Fisk near the end of the main Civil War storyline.


AudiobookEdit
GraphicAudio produced an audiobook of the prose hardcover novel, the audiobook contains 6 CDs and features a full cast, music and sound effects. It was released on March 1, 2013 and is six hours long.


TelevisionEdit
In The Avengers: Earth's Mightiest Heroes episode "The Man Who Stole Tomorrow," the Negative Zone prison "42" makes an appearance although only to incarcerate supervillains. Like in the comics it was designated 42 because it was Tony Stark's and Reed Richards' 42nd idea for improving the world. Later in "Hail HYDRA!", Maria Hill states that she will talk to the President about registering with S.H.I.E.L.D. Notably unlike the comics, Tony Stark is against the idea of registering, as seen in his conversations with Hill in the episode "Alone Against A.I.M.", citing among other reasons the Good Samaritan principle.
The events of Civil War will be adapted in some capacity for Avengers: Ultron Revolution.


Video gamesEdit
In Spider-Man: Web of Shadows, the game makes a reference to Civil War by showing a huge billboard displaying a Daily Bugle article talking about the Superhuman Registration Act and whether it will pass.
The video game Marvel: Ultimate Alliance 2 features the Secret War first, and then the Civil War storyline. Like the comics, Nitro invokes the Civil War by blowing up a neighborhood in Stamford, Connecticut. After the accident, the player chooses sides in the war. What makes this different from the comics is that Iron Man loses control of the nanite-controlled villains resulting the villains combining into a nanite-based hive mind known as "the Fold" forcing Nick Fury to unite both sides to stop the Fold before everyone in the world is infected by the nanites. Because of the incident with the nanite-controlled villains, the Superhero Registration Act was temporarily suspended. After the Fold is defeated, there are two endings to this game depending on the side the players take. If the player completes the game on the Pro-Registration side, the Superhuman Registration Act gets amended so that superheroes can volunteer for the program and not have to reveal their secret identities. If the player completes the game on the Anti-Registration side, the Superhuman Registration Act is repealed.
In the crossover fighting game, Marvel vs. Capcom 3: The Fate of Two Worlds, if Captain America defeats Iron Man as his last opponent, he says "And that was for Civil War!"; conversely, if Iron Man beats Captain America as his last opponent, he says "It's like Civil War all over again". There is also a trophy/achievement called "Whose Side Are You On?" described as "Bring about an end to the Civil War in an online match". This is awarded for having an online battle involving Captain America and Iron Man on opposite sides.


FilmEdit
In October 2014, Marvel confirmed that the third Captain America film would be titled Captain America: Civil War. The film stars Chris Evans as Steve Rogers / Captain America and is joined by Robert Downey, Jr. as Tony Stark / Iron Man, Scarlett Johansson as Natasha Romanoff / Black Widow, Anthony Mackie as Sam Wilson / Falcon, Emily VanCamp as Sharon Carter / Agent 13, Paul Bettany as Vision, Jeremy Renner as Clint Barton / Hawkeye, Don Cheadle as James "Rhodey" Rhodes / War Machine, Sebastian Stan as Bucky Barnes / Winter Soldier, Elizabeth Olsen as Wanda Maximoff / Scarlet Witch, Paul Rudd as Scott-Lang / Ant-Man, Chadwick Boseman as T'Challa / Black Panther and Tom Holland as Peter Parker / Spider-Man. Marvel Studios president Kevin Feige explained that since superhero secret identities do not exist in the Marvel Cinematic Universe, the film will be more about world governments demanding accountability and oversight of superheroes instead of them forcibly revealing their true identity to the authorities.


See alsoEdit
Civil War: Front Line
Civil War: X-Men
Civil War: Young Avengers/Runaways
Avengers: The Initiative
Civil War: The Initiative
The Mighty Avengers


ReferencesEdit


External linksEdit
Civil War at the Comic Book DB
Civil War Covers
Civil War Review | BGN Favourable review of Civil War